<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-10" id="chapter-10-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
			<p>He was sick at heart as he reached Paris. It was the first time he had been there since the death of Olivier. He had wished never to see the city again. In the cab which took him from the station to his hotel he hardly dared look out of the window; for the first few days he stayed in his room and could not bring himself to go out. He was fearful of the memories lying in wait for him outside. But what exactly did he dread? Did he really know? Was it, as he tried to believe, the terror of seeing the dead spring to life again exactly as they had been? Or was it⁠—the greater sorrow of being forced to know that they were dead?⁠ ⁠… Against this renewal of grief all the half-unconscious ruses of instinct had taken up arms. It was for this reason⁠—(though perhaps he knew it not)⁠—that he had chosen a hotel in a district far removed from that in which he had lived. And when for the first time he went out into the streets, having to conduct rehearsals at the concert-hall, when once more he came in contact with the life of Paris, he walked for a long time with his eyes closed, refusing to see what he did see, insisting on seeing only what he had seen in old days. He kept on saying to himself:</p>
			<p>“I know that. I know that.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>In art as in politics there was the same intolerant anarchy. The same Fair in the marketplace. Only the actors had changed their parts. The revolutionaries of his day had become bourgeois, and the supermen had become men of fashion. The old independents were trying to stifle the new independents. The young men of twenty years ago were now more conservative than the old conservatives whom they had fought, and their critics refused the newcomers the right to live. Apparently nothing was different.</p>
			<p>But everything had changed.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<hr/>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“<span epub:type="z3998:salutation">My dear</span>, forgive me. It is good of you not to be angry with me for my silence. Your letter has helped me greatly. I have been through several weeks of terrible distress. I had nothing. I had lost you. Here I was feeling terribly the absence of those whom I have lost. All my old friends of whom I used to tell you have disappeared⁠—Philomela⁠—(you remember the singing voice that dear, sad night when, as I wandered through a gay crowd, I saw your eyes in a mirror gazing at me)⁠—Philomela has realized her very reasonable dream: she inherited a little money, and has a farm in Normandy. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Arnaud has retired and gone back to the provinces with his wife, to a little town near Angers. Of the famous men of my day many are dead or gone under; none are left save the same old puppets who twenty years ago were playing the juvenile lead in art and politics, and with the same false faces are still playing it. Outside these masks there are none whom I recognize. They seem to me to be grimacing over a grave. It is a terrible feeling.⁠—More than this: during the first few days after my arrival I suffered physically from the ugliness of things, from the gray light of the North after your golden sun: the masses of dull houses, the vulgar lines of certain domes and monuments, which had never struck me before, hurt me cruelly. Nor was the moral atmosphere any more to my taste.</p>
				<p>“And yet I have no complaint to make of the Parisians. They have given me a welcome altogether different from that which I received before. In my absence I seem to have become a kind of celebrity. I will say nothing of that, for I know what it is worth. I am touched by all the pleasant things which these people say and write of me, and am obliged to them. But what shall I say to you? I felt much nearer the people who attacked me in old days than I do to the people who laud me now.⁠ ⁠… It is my own fault, I know. Don’t scold me. I had a moment of uneasiness. It was to be expected. It is done now. I understand. Yes. You are right to have sent me back among men. I was in a fair way to be buried in my solitude. It is unhealthy to play at Zarathustra. The flood of life moves on, moves on away from us. There comes a time when one is as a desert. Many weary days in the burning sun are needed to dig a new channel in the sand, to dig down to the river.⁠—It has been done. I am no longer dizzy. I am in the current again. I look and see.</p>
				<p>“My dear, what a strange people are the French! Twenty years ago I thought they were finished.⁠ ⁠… They are just beginning again. My dear comrade, Jeannin, foretold it. But I thought he was deceiving himself. How could one believe it then! France was, like their Paris, full of broken houses, plaster, and holes. I said: ‘They have destroyed everything.⁠ ⁠… What a race of rodents!’⁠—a race of beavers. Just when you think them prostrate on their ruins, lo, they are using the ruins to lay the foundations of a new city. I can see it now in the scaffoldings which are springing up on all sides.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse" xml:lang="de">
					<p>
						<span>“Wenn ein Ding geschehen</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Selbst die Narren es verstehen,⁠ ⁠…”</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>“In truth there is just the same French disorder. One needs to be used to it to see in the rout seething up from all directions, the bands of workmen, each going about his appointed task. There are also people who can do nothing without vilifying what their neighbors are doing. All this is calculated to upset the stoutest head. But when you have lived, as I have, nearly ten years with them, you cannot be deceived by their uproar. You see then that it is their way of spurring themselves on to work. They talk, but they work, and as each builder’s yard sets about building a house, in the end you find that the city has been re-builded. What is most remarkable is that, taken together, all these buildings are not discordant. They may maintain opposing theses, but all their minds are cast in the same mold. So that, beneath their anarchy, there are common instincts, a racial logic which takes the place of discipline, and this discipline is, when all is told, probably more solid than that of a Prussian regiment.</p>
				<p>“Everywhere the same enthusiasm, the same constructive fever: in politics, where Socialists and Nationalists vie with one another in tightening up the wheels of slackened power; in art, which some wish to make into an old aristocratic mansion for the privileged few, and others a vast hall open to the people, a hall where the collective soul can sing; they are reconstructors of the past, or constructors of the future. But whatever they do, these ingenious creatures are forever building the same cells. They have the instincts of beavers or bees, and through the ages are forever doing the same things, returning to the same forms. The most revolutionary among them are perhaps those who most closely cling, though they may not know it, to the most ancient traditions. Among the syndicates and the most striking of the young writers I have found purely medieval souls.</p>
				<p>“Now that I have grown used to their tumultuous ways, I can watch them working with pleasure. Let us be frank: I am too old a bear ever to feel at ease in any of their houses: I need the open air. But what good workers they are! That is their highest virtue. It laves the most mediocre and the most corrupt: and then, in their artists, what a sense of beauty! I remarked that much less in the old days. You taught me to see. My eyes were opened in the light of Rome. Your Renaissance men have helped me to understand these. A page of Debussy, a torso of Rodin, a phrase of Suarès, these are all in the direct line from your <i xml:lang="it">cinquecestenti</i>.</p>
				<p>“Not that there is not much that is distasteful to me here. I have found my old friends of the marketplace, who used to drive me to fury. They have not changed. But, alas! I have changed. I cannot be severe. When I feel myself wanting to judge one of them harshly I say to myself: ‘You have no right. You have done worse than these men, though you thought yourself so strong.’ Also, I have learned that nothing exists in vain, and that even the vilest have their place in the scheme of the tragedy. The depraved dilettantists, the foetid amoralists, have accomplished their termitic task; the tottering ruins must be brought down before they can be built up again. The Jews have been true to their sacred mission, which is, in the midst of other races, to be a foreign race, the race which, from end to end of the world, is to link up the network of human unity. They break down the intellectual barriers between the nations, to give Divine Reason an open field. The worst agents of corruption, the ironic destroyers who ruin our old beliefs and kill our well-beloved dead, toil, unwittingly, in the holy work of new life. So the ferocious self-interest of the cosmopolitan bankers, whose labors are attended with such and so many disasters, build, whether they will or no, the future peace of the world, side by side with the revolutionaries who combat them, far more surely than the idiotic pacifists.</p>
				<p>“You see, I am getting old. I have lost my bite. My teeth have lost their sharpness. When I go to the theater I am now only one of those simple spectators who apostrophize the actors and cry shame on the traitor.</p>
				<p>“My tranquil Grace, I am only talking about myself: and yet I think only of you. If you knew how importunate is my ego! It is oppressive and absorbing. It is like a millstone that God has tied round my neck. How I should have loved to lay it at your feet! But what would you have done with it? It is a poor kind of present.⁠ ⁠… Your feet were made to tread the soft earth and the sand sinking beneath the tread. I see your feet carelessly passing over the lawns dappled with anemones.⁠ ⁠… (Have you been again to the Villa Doria?)⁠ ⁠… And you are tired! I see you now half-reclining in your favorite retreat, in your drawing-room, propped up on your elbow, holding a book which you do not read. You listen to me kindly, without paying much attention to what I say; for I am tiresome, and, for patience, you turn every now and then to your own thoughts; but you are courteous, and, taking care not to upset me, when a chance word brings you back from your distant journeying, your eyes, so absent before, quickly take on an expression of interest. And I am as far from what I am saying as you: I, too, hardly hear the sound of my words: and while I follow their reflection in your lovely face, in my heart I listen to other words which I do not speak to you. Those words, my tranquil Grace, unlike the others, you hear quite clearly, but you pretend not to hear them.</p>
				<p>“Adieu. I think you will see me again in a little while, I shall not languish here. What should I do now that my concerts are over?⁠—I kiss your children on their little cheeks. They are yours and you. I must be content!⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">“Christophe.”</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<hr/>
			<p>“Tranquil Grace” replied:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">“My dear,</p>
				<p>“I received your letter in the little corner of the drawing-room that you remember so well, and I read it, as I am clever at reading, by letting your letter fall every now and then and resting. Don’t laugh at me. I did that to make it last a long time. In that way we spent a whole afternoon together. The children asked me what it was I kept on reading. I told them it was a letter from you. Aurora looked at the paper pityingly and said: ‘How tiresome it must be to write such a long letter!’ I tried to make her understand that it was not an imposition I had set you, but a conversation we were having together. She listened without a word, then ran away with her brother to play in the next room, and a little later, when Lionello began to shout, I heard Aurora say: ‘You mustn’t make such a noise: mamma is talking to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Christophe.’</p>
				<p>“What you tell me about the French interests me, but it does not surprise me. You remember that I often used to reproach you with being unjust towards them. It is impossible to like them. But what an intelligent people they are! There are mediocre nations who are preserved by their goodness of heart or their physical vigor. The French are saved by their intelligence. It laves all their weaknesses, and regenerates them. When you think they are down, beaten, perverted, they find new youth in the ever-bubbling spring of their minds.</p>
				<p>“But I must scold you. You ask my pardon for speaking only of yourself. You are an <i xml:lang="it">ingannatore</i>. You tell me nothing about yourself. Nothing of what you have been doing. Nothing of what you have been seeing. My cousin Colette⁠—(why did not you go and see her?)⁠—had to send me press-cuttings about your concerts, or I should have known nothing of your success. You only mentioned it by the way. Are you so detached from everything?⁠ ⁠… It is not true. Tell me that it pleased you.⁠ ⁠… It must please you, if only because it pleases me. I don’t like you to have a disillusioned air. The tone of your letter is melancholic. That must not be.⁠ ⁠… It is good that you are more just to others. But that is no reason why you should abase yourself, as you do, by saying that you are worse than the worst of them. A good Christian would applaud you. I tell you it is a bad thing. I am not a good Christian. I am a good Italian, and I don’t like you tormenting yourself with the past. The present is quite enough. I don’t know exactly what it was that you did. You told me the story in a very few words, and I think I guessed the rest. It was not a nice story, but you are nonetheless dear to me for it. My poor, dear Christophe, a woman does not reach my age without knowing that an honest man is often very weak. If one did not know his weakness one would not love him so much. Don’t think anymore about what you have done. Think of what you are going to do. Repentance is quite useless. Repentance means going back. And in good as in evil, we must always go forward. <i xml:lang="it">Sempre avanti, Savoia!</i>⁠ ⁠… So you think I am going to let you come back to Rome! You have nothing to do here. Stay in Paris, work, do: play your part in its artistic life. I will not have you throw it all up. I want you to make beautiful things, I want them to succeed, I want you to be strong and to help the new young Christophes who are setting out on the same struggles, and passing through the same trials. Look for them, help them, be kinder to your juniors than your seniors were to you.⁠—In fine, I want you to be strong because I know that you are strong: you have no idea of the strength that gives me.</p>
				<p>“Almost every day I go with the children to the Villa Borghese. Yesterday we drove to Ponte Molle, and walked round the tower of Monte Mario. You slander my powers of walking and my legs cry out against you: ‘What did the fellow mean by saying at the Villa Doria that we get tired in ten paces? He knows nothing about it. If we are not prone to give ourselves trouble, it is because we are lazy, and not because we cannot.⁠ ⁠…’ You forget, my dear, that I am a little peasant.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>“Go and see my cousin Colette. Are you still angry with her? She is a good creature at heart, and she swears by you! Apparently the Parisian women are crazy about your music. (Perhaps they were in the old days.) My Berne bear may, and he will, be the lion of Paris. Have you had letters? And declarations? You don’t mention any woman. Can you be in love? Tell me. I am not jealous. <span epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your friend,</span></p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">“G.”</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<hr/>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“… So you think I am likely to be pleased with your last sentence! I would to God you were jealous! But don’t look to me to make you so. I have no taste for these mad Parisiennes, as you call them. Mad? They would like to be so. But they are nothing like it. You need not hope that they will turn my head. There would be more chance of it perhaps if they were indifferent to my music. But it is only too true that they love it; and how am I to keep my illusions? When anyone tells you that he understands you, you may be very sure that he will never do so.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>“Don’t take my joking too seriously. The feeling I have for you does not make me unjust to other women. I have never had such true sympathy for them as I have now since I ceased to look at them with lover’s eyes. The tremendous effort they have been making during the last thirty years to escape from the degrading and unwholesome semi-domesticity, to which our stupid male egoism condemned them, to their and our unhappiness, seems to me to be one of the most splendid facts of our time. In a town like this one learns to admire the new generation of young women, who, in spite of so many obstacles, with so much fresh ardor rush on to the conquest of knowledge and diplomas⁠—the knowledge, the diplomas which, they think, must liberate them, open to them the arcana of the unknown world and make them the equals of men.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>“No doubt their faith is illusory and rather ridiculous. But progress is never realized as we expect it to be: it is nonetheless realized because it takes entirely different paths from those we have marked out for it. This effort of the women will not be wasted. It will make women completer and more human, as they were in the great ages. They will no longer be without interest in the living questions of the world, as most scandalously and monstrously they have been, for it is intolerable that a woman, though she be never so careful in her domestic duties, should think herself absolved from thinking of her civic duties in the modern city. Their great-great-grandmothers of the time of Joan of Arc and Catherine Sforza were not of this way of thinking. Woman has withered. We have refused her air and sun. She is taking them from us again by force. Ah! the brave little creatures!⁠ ⁠… Of course, many of those who are now struggling will die and many will be led astray. It is an age of crisis. The effort is too violent for those whose strength has too much gone to seed. When a plant has been for a long time without water, the first shower of rain is apt to scald it. But what would you? It is the price of progress. Those who come after will flourish through their sufferings. The poor little warlike virgins of our time, many of whom will never marry, will be more fruitful for posterity than the generations of matrons who gave birth before them; for, at the cost of their sacrifices, there will issue from them the women of a new classic age.</p>
				<p>“I have not found these working bees in your cousin Colette’s drawing-room. What whim was it made you send me to her? I had to obey you; but it is not well: you are abusing your power. I had refused three of her invitations, left two of her letters unanswered. She came and hunted me up at one of my rehearsals⁠—(they were going through my sixth symphony). I saw her, during the interval, come in with her nose in the air, sniffing and crying: ‘That smacks of love! Ah! How I love such music!⁠ ⁠…’</p>
				<p>“She has changed, physically; only her catlike eyes with their bulging pupils, and her fantastic nose, always wrinkling up and never still, are the same. But her face is wider, big-boned, highly colored, and coarsened. Sport has transformed her. She gives herself up to sport of all kinds. Her husband, as you know, is one of the swells at the Automobile Club and the Aero Club. There is not an aviation meeting, nor a race by air, land, or water, but the Stevens-Delestrades think themselves compelled to be present at it. They are always out on the highways and byways. Conversation is quite impossible; they talk of nothing but Racing, Rowing, Rugby, and the Derby. They belong to a new race of people. The days of <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera">Pelléas</i> are forever gone for the women. Souls are no longer in fashion. All the girls hoist a red, swarthy complexion, tanned by driving in the open air and playing games in the sun: they look at you with eyes like men’s eyes: they laugh and their laughter is a little coarse. In tone they have become more brutal, more crude. Every now and then your cousin will quite calmly say the most shocking things. She is a great eater, where she used to eat hardly anything. She still complains about her digestion, merely out of habit, but she never misses a mouthful for it. She reads nothing. No one reads among these people. Only music has found favor in their sight. Music has even profited by the neglect of literature. When these people are worn out, music is a Turkish bath to them, a warm vapor, massage, tobacco. They have no need to think. They pass from sport to love, and love also is a sport. But the most popular sport among their esthetic entertainments is dancing. Russian dancing, Greek dancing, Swiss dancing, American dancing, everything is set to a dance in Paris: Beethoven’s symphonies, the tragedies of Aeschylus, the <i epub:type="se:name.music" xml:lang="fr">Clavecin bien Tempéré</i>, the antiques of the Vatican, <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera">Orpheus</i>, Tristan, the Passion, and gymnastics. These people are suffering from vertigo.</p>
				<p>“The queer thing is to see how your cousin reconciles everything, her estheticism, her sport, and her practical sense (for she has inherited from her mother her sense of business and her domestic despotism). All these things ought to make an incredible mixture, but she is quite at her ease with them all: her most foolish eccentricities leave her mind quite clear, just as she keeps her eyes and hands sure when she goes whirling along in her motor. She is a masterful woman: her husband, her guests, her servants, she leads them all, with drums beating and colors flying. She is also busy with politics: she is for ‘Monseigneur’; not that I believe her to be a royalist, but it is another excuse for bestirring herself. And although she is incapable of reading more than ten pages of a book, she arranges the elections to the Academies.⁠—She set about extending her patronage to me. You may guess that that was not at all to my liking. What is most exasperating is that the fact of my having visited her in obedience to you has absolutely convinced her of her power over me. I take my revenge in thrusting home truths at her. She only laughs, and is never at a loss for a reply. ‘She is a good creature at heart.⁠ ⁠…’ Yes, provided she is occupied. She admits that herself: if the machine has nothing to grind she is capable of anything and everything to keep it going.⁠—I have been to her house twice. I shall not go again. Twice is enough to prove my obedience to you. You don’t want me to die? I leave her house broken, crushed, cramped. Last time I saw her I had a frightful nightmare after it: I dreamed I was her husband, all my life tied to that living whirlwind.⁠ ⁠… A foolish dream, and it need not trouble her real husband, for of all who go to the house he is the last to be seen with her, and when they are together they only talk of sport. They get on very well.</p>
				<p>“How could these people make my music a success? I try not to understand. I suppose it shocked them in a new way. They liked it for brutalizing them. For the time being they like art with a body to it. But they have not the faintest conception of the soul in the body: they will pass from the infatuation of today to the indifference of tomorrow, from the indifference of tomorrow to the abuse of the day after, without ever having known it. That is the history of all artists. I am under no illusion as to my success, and have not been for a long time: and they will make me pay for it.⁠—Meanwhile I see the most curious things going on. The most enthusiastic of my admirers is⁠ ⁠… (I give him you among a thousand)⁠ ⁠… our friend Lévy-Coeur. You remember the gentleman with whom I fought a ridiculous duel? Now he instructs those who used not to understand me. He does it very well too. He is the most intelligent of all the men talking about me. You may judge what the others are worth. There is nothing to be proud of, I assure you.</p>
				<p>“I don’t want to be proud of it. I am too humiliated when I hear the work for which I am belauded. I see myself in it, and what I see is not beautiful. What a merciless mirror is a piece of music to those who can see into it! Happily they are blind and deaf. I have put so much of my troubles and weaknesses into my work that sometimes it seems to me wicked to let loose upon the world such hordes of demons. I am comforted when I see the tranquillity of the audience: they are trebly armored: nothing can reach them: were it not so, I should be damned.⁠ ⁠… You reproach me with being too hard on myself. You do not know me as I know myself. They see what we are: they do not see what we might have been, and we are honored for what is not so much the effect of our qualities as of the events that bear us along, and the forces which control us. Let me tell you a story.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>“The other evening I was in one of the cafés where they play fairly good music, though in a queer way: with five or six instruments, filled out with a piano, they play all the symphonies, the masses, the oratorios. It is just like the stonecutters in Rome, where they sell the Medici chapel as an ornament for the mantelpiece. Apparently this is useful to art, which, if it is to circulate among men, must be turned into base coin. For the rest there is no deception in these concerts. The programs are copious, the musicians conscientious. I found a violoncellist there and entered into conversation with him: his eyes reminded me strangely of my father’s; he told me the story of his life. He was the grandson of a peasant, the son of a small official, a clerk in a <i xml:lang="fr">mairie</i> in a village in the North. They wanted to make him a gentleman, a lawyer, and he was sent to school in the neighboring town. He was a sturdy country boy, not at all fitted for being cooped up over the small work of a notary’s office, and he could not stay caged in: he used to jump over the wall, and wander through the fields, and run after the girls, and spend his strength in brawling: the rest of the time he lounged and dreamed of things he would never do. Only one thing had any attraction for him: music. God knows why! There was not a single musician in his family, except a rather cracked great-uncle, one of those odd, provincial characters, whose often remarkable intelligence and gifts are spent, in their proud isolation, on whims, and cranks, and trivialities. This great-uncle had invented a new system of notation⁠—(yet another!)⁠—which was to revolutionize music; he even claimed to have found a system of stenography by which words, tune, and accompaniment could be written simultaneously; but he never managed to transcribe it correctly himself. They just laughed at the old man in the family, but all the same, they were proud of him. They thought: ‘He is an old madman. Who knows? Perhaps he is a genius.’⁠—It was no doubt from him that the grandnephew had his mania for music. What music could he hear in the little town?⁠ ⁠… But bad music can inspire a love as pure as good music.</p>
				<p>“The unhappy part of it was that there seemed no possibility of confessing to such a passion in such surroundings: and the boy had not his great-uncle’s cracked brains. He hid away to read the old lunatic’s lucubrations which formed the basis of his queer musical education. Vain and fearful of his father and of public opinion, he would say nothing of his ambitions until he had succeeded. He was crushed by his family, and did as so many French people of the middle-class have to do when, out of weakness or kindness, they dare not oppose the will of their relations: they submit to all appearance, and live their true life in perpetual secrecy. Instead of following his bent, he struggled on, against his inclination, in the work they had marked out for him. He was as incapable of succeeding in it as he was of coming to grief. Somehow or other he managed to pass the necessary examinations. The main advantage to him was that he escaped from the spying of his father and the neighbors. The law crushed him: he was determined not to spend his life in it. But while his father was alive he dared not declare his desire. Perhaps it was not altogether distasteful to him to have to wait a little before he took the decisive step. He was one of those men who all their lives long dazzle themselves with what they will do later on, with the things they could do. For the moment he did nothing. He lost his bearings, and, intoxicated by his new life in Paris, gave himself up with all his young peasant brutality to his two passions, woman and music; he was crazed with the concerts he went to, no less than with pleasure. He wasted years doing this without even turning to account the means at hand of completing his musical education. His umbrageous pride, his unfortunate independent and susceptible character kept him from taking any course of lessons or asking anybody’s advice.</p>
				<p>“When his father died he sent Themis and Justinian packing. He began to compose without having had the courage to acquire the necessary technique. His inveterate habit of idle lounging and his taste for pleasure had made him incapable of any serious effort. He felt keenly: but his idea, and its form, would at once slip away: when all was told he expressed nothing but the commonplace. The worst of all was that there was really something great in this mediocrity. I read two of his old compositions. Here and there were striking ideas, left in the rough and then deformed. They were like fireflies over a bog.⁠ ⁠… And what a strange mind he had! He tried to explain Beethoven’s sonatas to me. He saw them as absurd, childish stories. But such passion as there was in him, such profound seriousness! Tears would come to his eyes as he talked. He would die for the thing he loves. He is touching and grotesque. Just as I was on the point of laughing in his face, I wanted to take him to my arms.⁠ ⁠… He is fundamentally honest, and has a healthy contempt for the charlatanry of the Parisian groups and their sham reputations⁠—(though at the same time he cannot help having the bourgeois admiration for successful men).⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>“He had a small legacy. In a few months it was all gone, and, finding himself without resources, he had, like so many others of his kind, the criminal honesty to marry a girl, also without resources, whom he had seduced; she had a fine voice, and played music without any love for it. He had to live on her voice and her mediocre talent until he had learned how to play the ’cello. Naturally it was not long before they saw their mediocrity, and could not bear each other. They had a little girl. The father transferred his power of illusion to the child, and thought that she would be what he had failed to be. The little girl took after her mother: she was made to play the piano, though she had not a shadow of talent; she adored her father, and applied herself to her work to please him. For several years they plied the hotels in the watering-places, picking up more insults than money. The child was ailing and overworked, and died. The wife grew desperate, and became more shrewish every day. So his life became one of endless misery, with no hope of escape, brightened only by an ideal which he knew himself to be incapable of attaining.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>“And, my dear, when I saw that poor broken devil, whose life has been nothing but a series of disappointments, I thought: ‘That is what I might have been.’ There was much in common in our boyhood, and certain adventures in our two lives are the same; I have even found a certain kinship in some of our musical ideas: but his have stopped short. What is it that has kept me from foundering as he has done? My will, no doubt. But also the chances of life. And even taking my will, is that due only to my merits? Is it not rather due to my descent, my friends, and God who has aided me?⁠ ⁠… Such thoughts make a man humble. With such thoughts he feels brotherly to all who love his art, and suffer for it.</p>
				<p>“From lowest to highest the distance is not so great.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>“On that I thought of what you said in your letter. You are right: an artist has no right to hold aloof, so long as he can help others. So I shall stay: I shall force myself to spend a few months in every year here, or in Vienna, or Berlin, although it is hard for me to grow accustomed to these cities again. But I must not abdicate. If I do not succeed in being of any great service, as I have good reason to think I shall not, perhaps my sojourn in these cities will be useful to me, myself. And I shall console myself with the thought that it was your wish. Besides⁠ ⁠… (I will not lie)⁠ ⁠… I am beginning to find it pleasant. Adieu, tyrant. You have triumphed. I am beginning not only to do what you want me to do, but to love doing it.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">“Christophe.”</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<hr/>
			<p>So he stayed, partly to please her, but also because his artistic curiosity was reawakened, and was drawn on to contemplation of the renewal of art. Everything that he saw and did he presented for Grazia’s scrutiny in his letters. He knew that he was deceiving himself as to the interest she would take in it all; he suspected her of a certain indifference. But he was grateful to her for not letting him see it too clearly.</p>
			<p>She answered him regularly once a fortnight. Affectionate, composed letters, like her gestures. When she told him of her life she never discarded her tender, proud reserve. She knew the violence with which her words went resounding through Christophe’s heart. She preferred that he should think her cold, rather than to send him flying to heights whither she did not wish to follow him. But she was too womanly not to know the secret of not discouraging her friend’s love, and of, at once, by gentle words, soothing the dismay and disappointment caused by her indifferent words. Christophe soon divined her tactics, and by a counter-trick tried in his turn to control his warmth and to write more composedly, so that Grazia’s replies should not be so studiously restrained.</p>
			<p>The longer he stayed in Paris the greater grew his interest in the new activity stirring in that gigantic ant-heap. He was the more interested in it all as in the young ants he found less sympathy with himself. He was not deceived: his success was a Pyrrhic victory. After an absence of ten years his return had created a sensation in Parisian society. But by an ironic turn of events, such as is by no means rare, he found himself patronized by his old enemies the snobs, and people of fashion: the artists were either mutely hostile or distrustful of him. He won his way by his name, which already belonged to the past, by his considerable accomplishment, by his tone of passionate conviction, and the violence of his sincerity. But if people were forced to reckon with him, to admire or respect him, they did not understand or love him. He was outside the art of the time. A monster, a living anachronism. He had always been that. His ten years of solitude had accentuated the contrast. During his absence in Europe, and especially in Paris, a great work of reconstruction had been carried through. A new order was springing to life. A generation was arising, desirous rather of action than of understanding, hungry rather for happiness than for truth. It wished to live, to grasp life, even at the cost of a lie. Lies of pride⁠—all manner of pride: pride of race, pride of caste, pride of religion, pride of culture and art⁠—all were food to this generation, provided that they were armor of steel, provided that they could be turned to sword and buckler, and that, sheltered by them, they could march on to victory. So to this generation it was distasteful to hear the great voice of torment reminding it of the existence of sorrow and doubt, those whirlwinds that had troubled the night that was hardly gone, and, in spite of its denials, went on menacing the universe, the whirlwinds that it wished to forget. These young people turned away in despite, and they shouted at the top of their voices to deafen themselves. But the voice was heard above them all. And they were angry.</p>
			<p>Christophe, on the other hand, regarded them with a friendly eye. He hailed the upward movement of the world towards happiness. The deliberate narrowness of its impulse affected him not at all. When a man wishes to go straight to his goal, he must look straight in front of him. For his part, sitting at the turning of the world, he was rejoiced to see behind him the tragic splendor of the night, and, in front of him, the smile of young hope, the uncertain beauty of the fresh, fevered dawn. And he was at the stationary point of the axis of the pendulum while the clock was beginning to go again. Without following its onward march, he listened joyfully to the beating of the rhythm of life. He joined in the hope of those who denied his past agonies. What would be, would be, as he had dreamed. Ten years before, in night and suffering, Olivier⁠—the little Gallic cock⁠—had with his frail song announced the distant day. The singer was no more; but his song was coming to pass. In the garden of France the birds were singing. And, above all the singing, clearer, louder, happier, Christophe suddenly heard the voice of Olivier come to life again.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>He was absently reading a book of poems at a bookstall. The name of the author was unknown to him. Certain words struck him and he went on reading. As he read on between the uncut pages he seemed to recognize a friendly voice, the features of a friend.⁠ ⁠… He could not define his feeling, nor could he bring himself to put the book down, and so he bought it. When he reached his room he resumed his reading. At once the old obsession descended on him. The impetuous rhythm of the poem evoked, with a visionary precision, the universe and age-old souls⁠—the gigantic trees of which we are all the leaves and the fruit⁠—the nations. From the pages there arose the superhuman figure of the Mother⁠—she who was before us, she who will be after us. She who reigns, like the Byzantine Madonnas, lofty as the mountains, at whose feet kneel and pray ant-like human beings. The poet was hymning the homeric struggle of the great goddesses, whose lances had clashed together since the beginning of the ages: the eternal Iliad which is to that of Troy what the Alps are to the little hills of Greece.</p>
			<p>Such an epic of warlike pride and action was far removed from the ideas of a European soul like Christophe’s. And yet, in gleams, in the vision of the French soul⁠—the graceful virgin, who bears the Aegis, Athena, with blue eyes shining through the darkness, the goddess of work, the incomparable artist, sovereign reason, whose glittering lance hurls down the tumultuously shouting barbarians⁠—Christophe perceived an expression, a smile that he knew and had loved. But just as he was on the point of fixing it the vision died away. And while he was exasperated by this vain pursuit, lo! as he turned a page, he came on a story which Olivier had told him a few days before his death.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>He was struck dumb. He ran to the publishers, and asked for the poet’s address. It was refused, as is the custom. He lost his temper. In vain. Finally he remembered that he could find what he wanted in a yearbook. He did find it, and went at once to the author’s house. When he wanted anything he found it impossible to wait.</p>
			<p>It was in the Batignolles district on the top floor. There were several doors opening onto a common landing. Christophe knocked at the door which had been pointed out to him. The next door opened. A young woman, not at all pretty, very dark, with low-growing hair and a sallow complexion⁠—a shriveled face with very sharp eyes⁠—asked what he wanted. She looked suspicious. Christophe told her why he had come, and, in answer to her next question, gave his name. She came out of her room and opened the other door with a key which she had in her pocket. But she did not let Christophe enter immediately. She told him to wait in the corridor, and went in alone, shutting the door in his face. At last Christophe reached the well-guarded sanctum. He crossed a half-empty room which served as a dining-room and contained only a few shabby pieces of furniture, while near the curtainless window several birds were twittering in an aviary. In the next room, on a threadbare divan, lay a man. He sat up to welcome Christophe. At once Christophe recognized the emaciated face, lit up by the soul, the lovely velvety black eyes burning with a feverish flame, the long, intelligent hands, the misshapen body, the shrill, husky voice.⁠ ⁠… Emmanuel! The little cripple boy who had been the innocent cause.⁠ ⁠… And Emmanuel, suddenly rising to his feet, had also recognized Christophe.</p>
			<p>They stood for a moment without speaking. Both of them saw Olivier.⁠ ⁠… They could not bring themselves to shake hands. Emmanuel had stepped backward. After ten long years, an unconfessed rancor, the old jealousy that he had had of Christophe, leaped forth from the obscure depths of instinct. He stood still, defiant and hostile.⁠—But when he saw Christophe’s emotion, when on his lips he read the name that was in their thoughts: “Olivier”⁠—it was stronger than he: he flung himself into the arms held out towards him.</p>
			<p>Emmanuel asked:</p>
			<p>“I knew you were in Paris. But how did you find me?”</p>
			<p>Christophe said: “I read your last book: through it I heard <em>his</em> voice.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Emmanuel. “You recognized it? I owe everything that I am now to him.”</p>
			<p>(He avoided pronouncing the name.)</p>
			<p>After a moment he went on gloomily:</p>
			<p>“He loved you more than me.”</p>
			<p>Christophe smiled:</p>
			<p>“If a man loves truly there is neither more nor less: he gives himself to all those whom he loves.”</p>
			<p>Emmanuel looked at Christophe: the tragic seriousness of his stubborn eyes was suddenly lit up with a profound sweetness. He took Christophe’s hand and made him sit on the divan by his side.</p>
			<p>Each told the story of his life. From fourteen to twenty-five Emmanuel had practised many trades: printer, upholsterer, pedlar, bookseller’s assistant, lawyer’s clerk, secretary to a politician, journalist.⁠ ⁠… In all of them he had found the means of learning feverishly, here and there finding the support of good people who were struck by the little man’s energy, more often falling into the hands of people who exploited his poverty and his gifts, turning his worst experiences to profit, and succeeding in fighting his way through without too much bitterness, leaving behind him only the remains of his feeble health. His singular aptitude for the dead languages (not so rare as one is inclined to believe in a race imbued with humanistic traditions) gained him the interest and support of an old Hellenizing priest. These studies, which he had no time to push very far, served him as mental discipline and a school of style. This man, who had risen from the dregs of the people, whose whole education had been won by his own efforts, haphazard, so that there were great gaps in it, had acquired a gift of verbal expression, a mastery of thought over form, such as ten years of a university education cannot give to the young bourgeois. He attributed it all to Olivier. And yet others had helped him more effectively. But from Olivier came the spark which in the night of this man’s soul had lighted the eternal flame. The rest had but poured oil into the lamp.</p>
			<p>He said:</p>
			<p>“I only began to understand him from the moment when he passed away. But everything he ever said had become a part of me. His light never left me.”</p>
			<p>He spoke of his work and the task which he declared had been left to him by Olivier; the awakening of the French, the kindling of that torch of heroic idealism of which Olivier had been the herald: he wished to make himself the resounding voice which should hover above the battlefield and declare the approaching victory: he sang the epic of the new-birth of his race.</p>
			<p>His poems were the product of that strange race that, through the ages, has so strongly preserved its old Celtic aroma, while it has ever taken a bizarre pride in clothing its ideas with the cast-off clothes and laws of the Roman conqueror. There were to be found in it absolutely pure the Gallic audacity, the spirit of heroic reason, of irony, the mixture of braggadocio and crazy bravura, which set out to pluck the beards of the Roman senators, and pillaged the temple of Delphi, and laughingly hurled its javelins at the sky. But this little Parisian dwarf had had to shape his passions, as his periwigged grandfathers had done, and as no doubt his great-grandnephews would do, in the bodies of the heroes and gods of Greece, two thousand years dead. It is a curious instinct in these people which accords well with their need of the absolute: as they impose their ideas on the remains of the ages, they seem to themselves to be imposing them on the ages. The constraint of his classic form only gave Emmanuel’s passions a more violent impulse. Olivier’s calm confidence in the destinies of France had been transformed in his little protégé into a burning faith, hungering for action and sure of triumph. He willed it, he said it, he clamored for it. It was by his exalted faith and his optimism that he had uplifted the souls of the French public. His book had been as effective as a battle. He had made a breach in the ranks of skepticism and fear. The whole younger generation had thronged to follow him towards the new destiny.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>He grew excited as he talked: his eyes burned, his pale face glowed pink in patches, and his voice rose to a scream. Christophe could not help noticing the contrast between the devouring fire and the wretched body that was its pyre. He was only half-conscious of the irony of this stroke of fate. The singer of energy, the poet who hymned the generation of intrepid sport, of action, war, could hardly walk without losing his breath, was extremely temperate, lived on a strict diet, drank water, could not smoke, lived without women, bore every passion in his body, and was reduced by his health to asceticism.</p>
			<p>Christophe watched Emmanuel, and he felt a mixture of admiration and brotherly pity. He tried not to show it: but no doubt his eyes betrayed his feeling. Emmanuel’s pride, which ever kept an open wound in his side, made him think he read commiseration in Christophe’s eyes, and that was more odious to him than hatred. The fire in him suddenly died down. He stopped talking. Christophe tried in vain to win back his confidence. His soul had closed up. Christophe saw that he was wounded.</p>
			<p>The hostile silence dragged on. Christophe got up. Emmanuel took him to the door without a word. His step declared his infirmity: he knew it: it was a point of pride with him to appear indifferent: but he thought Christophe was watching him, and his rancor grew.</p>
			<p>Just as he was coldly shaking hands with his guest, and saying goodbye, an elegant young lady rang at the door. She was escorted by a pretentious nincompoop whom Christophe recognized as a man he had seen at theatrical first-nights, smiling, chattering, waving his hand, kissing the hands of the ladies, and from his stall shedding smiles all over the theater: not knowing his name, he had called him “the buck.”⁠—The buck and his companion, on seeing Emmanuel, flung themselves on the “<i xml:lang="fr">cher maître</i>” with obsequious and familiar effusiveness. As Christophe walked away he heard Emmanuel in his dry voice saying that he was too busy to see anyone. He admired the man’s gift of being disagreeable. He did not know Emmanuel’s reasons for scowling at the rich snobs who came to gratify him with their indiscreet visits; they were prodigal of fine phrases and eulogy; but they no more thought of helping him in his poverty than the famous friends of César Franck ever dreamed of releasing him from the piano-lessons which he had to give up to the last to make a living.</p>
			<p>Christophe went several times again to see Emmanuel. He never succeeded in restoring the intimacy of his first visit. Emmanuel showed no pleasure in seeing him, and maintained a suspicious reserve. Every now and then he would be carried away by the generous need of expansion of his genius: a remark of Christophe’s would shake him to the very roots of his being: then he would abandon himself to a fit of enthusiastic confidence: and over his secret soul his idealism would cast the glowing light of a flashing poetry. Then, suddenly, he would fall back: he would shrivel up into sulky silence: and Christophe would find him hostile once more.</p>
			<p>They were divided by too many things. Not the least was the difference in their ages. Christophe was on the way to full consciousness and mastery of himself. Emmanuel was still in process of formation and more chaotic than Christophe had ever been. The originality of his face came from the contradictory elements that were at grips in him; a mighty stoicism, struggling to tame a nature consumed by atavistic desires⁠—(he was the son of a drunkard and a prostitute);⁠—a frantic imagination which tugged against the bit of a will of steel; an immense egoism, and an immense love for others, and of the two it were impossible to tell which would be the conqueror; an heroic idealism and a morbid thirst for glory which made him impatient of other superiorities. If Olivier’s ideas, and his independence, and his disinterestedness were in him, if Emmanuel was superior to his master by his plebeian vitality which knew not disgust in the face of action, by his poetic genius and his thicker skin, which protected him from disgust of all kinds, yet he was very far from reaching the serenity of Antoinette’s brother: his character was vain and uneasy: and the restlessness of other people only augmented his own.</p>
			<p>He lived in a stormy alliance with a young woman who was his neighbor, the woman who had received Christophe on his first visit. She loved Emmanuel, and was jealously busy over him, looked after his house, copied out his work, and wrote to his dictation. She was not beautiful, and she bore the burden of a passionate soul. She came of the people, and for a long time worked in a bookbinding workshop, then in the post-office. Her childhood had been spent in the stifling atmosphere common to all the poor workpeople of Paris: souls and bodies all huddled together, harassing work, perpetual promiscuity, no air, no silence, never any solitude, no opportunity for recuperation or of defending the inner sanctuary of the heart. She was proud in spirit, with her mind ever seething with a religious fervor for a confused ideal of truth. Her eyes were worn out with copying out at night, sometimes without a lamp, by moonlight, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les Misérables</i> of Hugo. She had met Emmanuel at a time when he was more unhappy than she, ill and without resources; and she had devoted herself to him. This passion was the first, the only living love of her life. So she attached herself to him with a hungry tenacity. Her affection was a terrible trial to Emmanuel, who rather submitted to than shared it. He was touched by her devotion: he knew that she was his best friend, the only creature to whom he was everything, who could not do without him. But this very feeling overwhelmed him. He needed liberty and isolation; her eyes always greedily beseeching a look obsessed him: he used to speak harshly to her, and longed to say: “Go!” He was irritated by her ugliness and her clumsy manners. Though he had seen but little of fashionable society, and though he heartily despised it⁠—(for he suffered at appearing even uglier and more ridiculous there)⁠—he was sensitive to elegance, and alive to the attraction of women who felt towards him (he had no doubt of it) exactly as he felt towards his friend. He tried to show her an affection which he did not possess or, at least, which was continually obscured by gusts of involuntary hatred. He could not do it: he had a great generous heart in his bosom, hungering to do good, and also a demon of violence, capable of much evil. This inward struggle and his consciousness of his inability to end it to his advantage plunged him into a state of acute irritation, which he vented on Christophe.</p>
			<p>Emmanuel could not help feeling a double antipathy towards Christophe; firstly because of his old jealousy (one of those childish passions which still subsist, though we may forget the cause of them): secondly, because of his fierce nationalism. In France he had embodied all the dreams of justice, pity, and human brotherhood conceived by the best men of the preceding age. He did not set France against the rest of Europe as an enemy whose fortune is swelled by the ruin of the other nations, but placed her at their head, as the legitimate sovereign who reigns for the good of all⁠—the sword of the ideal, the guide of the human race. Rather than see her commit an injustice he would have preferred to see her dead. But he had no doubt of her. He was exclusively French in culture and in heart, nourished wholly by the French tradition, the profound reasons of which he found in his own instinct. Quite sincerely he ignored foreign thought, for which he had a sort of disdainful condescension⁠—and was exasperated if a foreigner did not accept his lowly position.</p>
			<p>Christophe saw all that, but, being older and better versed in life, he did not worry about it. If such pride of race could not but be injurious, Christophe was not touched by it: he could appreciate the illusions of filial love, and never dreamed of criticising the exaggerations of a sacred feeling. Besides, humanity is profited by the vain belief of the nations in their mission. Of all the reasons at hand for feeling himself estranged from Emmanuel only one hurt him: Emmanuel’s voice, which at times rose to a shrill, piercing scream. Christophe’s ears suffered cruelly. He could not help making a face when it happened. He tried to prevent Emmanuel’s seeing it. He endeavored to hear the music and not the instrument. There was such a beauty of heroism shining forth from the crippled poet when he evoked the victories of the mind, the forerunners of other victories, the conquest of the air, the “flying God” who should upraise the peoples, and, like the star of Bethlehem, lead them in his train, in ecstasies, towards far distant spaces or near revenge. The splendor of these visions of energy did not prevent Christophe’s seeing their danger, and foreknowing whither this change and the growing clamor of the new Marseillaise would lead. He thought, with a little irony, (with no regret for past or fear of the future), that the song would find an echo that the singer could not foresee, and that a day would come when men would sigh for the vanished days of the Marketplace.⁠—How free they were then! The golden age of liberty! Never would its like be known again. The world was moving on to the age of strength, of health, of virile action, and perhaps of glory, but also of harsh authority and narrow order. We shall have called it enough with our prayers, the age of iron, the classic age! The great classic ages⁠—Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> or Napoleon⁠—seem now at a distance the peaks of humanity. And perhaps the nation therein most victoriously realized its ideal State. But go and ask the heroes of those times what they thought of them! Your Nicolas Poussin went to live and die in Rome; he was stifled in your midst. Your Pascal, your Racine, said farewell to the world. And among the greatest, how many others lived apart in disgrace, and oppressed! Even the soul of a man like Molière hid much bitterness.⁠—For your Napoleon, whom you so greatly regret, your fathers do not seem to have had any doubt as to their happiness, and the master himself was under no illusion; he knew that when he disappeared the world would say: “Ouf!”⁠ ⁠… What a wilderness of thought surrounds the Imperator! Over the immensity of the sands, the African sun.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Christophe did not say all that was in his mind. A few hints were enough to set Emmanuel in a fury, and he did not try the experiment again. But it was in vain that he kept his thoughts to himself: Emmanuel knew what he was thinking. More than that, he was obscurely conscious that Christophe saw farther than he. And he was only irritated by it. Young people never forgive their elders for forcing them to see what they will see in twenty years’ time.</p>
			<p>Christophe read his heart, and said to himself:</p>
			<p>“He is right. Every man his own faith. A man must believe what he believes. God keep me from disturbing his confidence in the future!”</p>
			<p>But his mere presence upset Emmanuel. When two personalities are together, however hard they try to efface themselves, one always crushes the other, and the other always feels rancor and humiliation. Emmanuel’s pride was hurt by Christophe’s superiority in experience and character. And perhaps also he was keeping back the love which he felt growing in himself for him.</p>
			<p>He became more and more shy. He locked his door, and did not answer letters.⁠—Christophe had to give up seeing him.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>During the first days of July Christophe reckoned up what he had gained by his few months’ stay in Paris: many new ideas, but few friends. Brilliant and derisory successes, in which he saw his own image and the image of his work weakened or caricatured in mediocre minds; and there is but scant pleasure in that. And he failed to win the sympathy of those by whom he would have loved to be understood; they had not welcomed his advances; he could not throw in his lot with them, however much he desired to share their hopes and to be their ally; it was as though their uneasy vanity shunned his friendship and found more satisfaction in having him for an enemy. In short, he had let the tide of his own generation pass without passing with it, and the tide of the next generation would have nothing to do with him. He was isolated, and was not surprised, for all his life he had been accustomed to it. But now he thought he had won the right, after this fresh attempt, to return to his Swiss hermitage, until he had realized a project which for some time past had been taking shape. As he grew older he was tormented with the desire to return and settle down in his own country. He knew nobody there, and would find even less intellectual kinship than in this foreign city: but nonetheless it was his country: you do not ask those of your blood to think your thoughts: between them and you there are a thousand secret ties; the senses learned to read in the same book of sky and earth, and the heart speaks the same language.</p>
			<p>He gaily narrated his disappointments to Grazia, and told her of his intention of returning to Switzerland: jokingly he asked her permission to leave Paris, and assured her that he was going during the following week. But at the end of the letter there was a postscript saying:</p>
			<p>“I have changed my mind. My departure is postponed.”</p>
			<p>Christophe had entire confidence in Grazia: he gave into her hands the secret of his inmost thoughts. And yet there was a room in his heart of which he kept the key: it contained the memories which did not belong only to himself, but to those whom he had loved. He kept back everything concerning Olivier. His reserve was not deliberate. The words would not come from his lips whenever he tried to talk to Grazia about Olivier. She had never known him.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Now, on the morning when he was writing to his friend, there came a knock on the door. He went to open it, cursing at being interrupted. A boy of fourteen or fifteen asked for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Krafft. Christophe gruffly bade him come in. He was fair, with blue eyes, fine features, not very tall, with a slender, erect figure. He stood in front of Christophe, rather shyly, and said not a word. Quickly he pulled himself together, and raised his limpid eyes, and looked at him with keen interest. Christophe smiled as he scanned the boy’s charming face, and the boy smiled too.</p>
			<p>“Well?” said Christophe. “What do you want?”</p>
			<p>“I came,” said the boy.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>(And once more he became confused, blushed, and was silent.)</p>
			<p>“I can see that you have come,” said Christophe, laughing. “But why have you come? Look at me. Are you afraid of me?”</p>
			<p>The boy smiled once more, shook his head, and said:</p>
			<p>“No.”</p>
			<p>“Bravo! Then tell me who you are.”</p>
			<p>“I am.⁠ ⁠…” said the boy.</p>
			<p>He stopped once more. His eyes wandered curiously round the room, and lighted on a photograph of Olivier on the mantelpiece.</p>
			<p>“Come!” said Christophe. “Courage!”</p>
			<p>The boy said:</p>
			<p>“I am his son.”</p>
			<p>Christophe started: he got up from his chair, took hold of the boy’s arm, and drew him to him; he sank back into his chair and held him in a close embrace: their faces almost touched; and he gazed and gazed at him, saying:</p>
			<p>“My boy.⁠ ⁠… My poor boy.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Suddenly he took his face in his hands and kissed his brow, eyes, cheeks, nose, hair. The boy was frightened and shocked by such a violent demonstration, and broke away from him. Christophe let him go. He hid his face in his hand, and leaned his brow against the wall, and sat so for the space of a few moments. The boy had withdrawn to the other end of the room. Christophe raised his head. His face was at rest: he looked at the boy with an affectionate smile.</p>
			<p>“I frightened you,” he said. “Forgive me.⁠ ⁠… You see, I loved him.”</p>
			<p>The boy was still frightened, and said nothing.</p>
			<p>“How like you are to him!” said Christophe.⁠ ⁠… “And yet I should not have recognized you. What is it that has changed?⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>He asked:</p>
			<p>“What is your name?”</p>
			<p>“Georges.”</p>
			<p>“Oh! yes. I remember. Christophe Olivier Georges.⁠ ⁠… How old are you?”</p>
			<p>“Fourteen.”</p>
			<p>“Fourteen! Is it so long ago?⁠ ⁠… It is as though it were yesterday⁠—or far back in the darkness of time.⁠ ⁠… How like you are to him! The same features. It is the same, and yet another. The same colored eyes, but not the same eyes. The same smile, the same lips, but not the same voice. You are stronger. You hold yourself more erect: your face is fuller, but you blush just as he used to do. Come, sit down, let us talk. Who sent you to me?”</p>
			<p>“No one.”</p>
			<p>“You came of your own accord? How do you know about me?”</p>
			<p>“People have talked to me about you.”</p>
			<p>“Who?”</p>
			<p>“My mother.”</p>
			<p>“Ah!” said Christophe. “Does she know that you came to see me?”</p>
			<p>“No.”</p>
			<p>Christophe said nothing for a moment; then he asked:</p>
			<p>“Where do you live?”</p>
			<p>“Near the Parc Monçeau.”</p>
			<p>“You walked here? Yes? It is a long way. You must be tired.”</p>
			<p>“I am never tired.”</p>
			<p>“Good! Show me your arms.”</p>
			<p>(He felt them.)</p>
			<p>“You are a strong boy.⁠ ⁠… What put it into your head to come and see me?”</p>
			<p>“My father loved you more than anyone.”</p>
			<p>“Did she tell you so?”</p>
			<p>(He corrected himself.)</p>
			<p>“Did your mother tell you so?”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>Christophe smiled pensively. He thought: “She too!⁠ ⁠… How they all loved him! Why did they not let him see it?⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>He went on:</p>
			<p>“Why did you wait so long before you came?”</p>
			<p>“I wanted to come sooner. But I thought you would not want to see me.”</p>
			<p>“I!”</p>
			<p>“I saw you several weeks ago at the Chevillard concerts: I was with my mother, sitting a little away from you: I bowed to you: you looked through me, and frowned, and took no notice.”</p>
			<p>“I looked at you?⁠ ⁠… My poor boy, how could you think that?⁠ ⁠… I did not see you. My eyes are tired. That is why I frown.⁠ ⁠… You don’t think me so cruel as that?”</p>
			<p>“I think you could be cruel too, if you wanted to be.”</p>
			<p>“Really?” said Christophe. “In that case, if you thought I did not want to see you, how did you dare to come?”</p>
			<p>“Because I wanted to see you.”</p>
			<p>“And if I had refused to see you?”</p>
			<p>“I shouldn’t have let you do that.” He said this with a little decided air, at once shy and provoking.</p>
			<p>Christophe burst out laughing, and Georges laughed too.</p>
			<p>“You would have sent me packing! Think of that! You rogue!⁠ ⁠… No, decidedly, you are not like your father.”</p>
			<p>A shadow passed over the boy’s mobile face.</p>
			<p>“You think I am not like him? But you said, just now⁠ ⁠… ? You don’t think he would have loved me? You don’t love me?”</p>
			<p>“What difference does it make to you whether I love you or not?”</p>
			<p>“A great deal of difference.”</p>
			<p>“Because⁠ ⁠… ?”</p>
			<p>“Because I love you.”</p>
			<p>In a moment his eyes, his lips, all his features, took on a dozen different expressions, like the shadows of the clouds on an April day chasing over the fields before the spring winds. Christophe had the most lovely joy in gazing at him and listening to him; it seemed to him that all the cares of the past were washed away; his sorrowful experiences, his trials, his sufferings and Olivier’s sufferings, all were wiped out: he was born again in this young shoot of Olivier’s life.</p>
			<p>They talked on. Georges knew nothing of Christophe’s music until the last few months, but since Christophe had been in Paris, he had never missed a concert at which his work was played. He spoke of it with an eager expression, his eyes shining and laughing, with the tears not far behind: he was like a lover. He told Christophe that he adored music, and that he wanted to be a composer. But after a question or two, Christophe saw that the boy knew not even the elements of music. He asked about his work. Young Jeannin was at the lycée; he said cheerfully that he was not a good scholar.</p>
			<p>“What are you best at? Literature or science?”</p>
			<p>“Very much the same.”</p>
			<p>“What? What? Are you a dunce?”</p>
			<p>The boy laughed frankly and said:</p>
			<p>“I think so.”</p>
			<p>Then he added confidentially:</p>
			<p>“But I know that I am not, all the same.”</p>
			<p>Christophe could not help laughing.</p>
			<p>“Then why don’t you work? Aren’t you interested in anything?”</p>
			<p>“No. I’m interested in everything.”</p>
			<p>“Well, then, why?”</p>
			<p>“Everything is so interesting that there is no time.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“No time? What the devil do you do?”</p>
			<p>He made a vague gesture:</p>
			<p>“Many things. I play music, and games, and I go to exhibitions. I read.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“You would do better to read your schoolbooks.”</p>
			<p>“We never read anything interesting in school.⁠ ⁠… Besides, we travel. Last month I went to England to see the Oxford and Cambridge match.”</p>
			<p>“That must help your work a great deal!”</p>
			<p>“Bah! You learn much more that way than by staying at the lycée.”</p>
			<p>“And what does your mother say to that?”</p>
			<p>“Mother is very reasonable. She does whatever I want.”</p>
			<p>“You bad boy!⁠ ⁠… You can thank your stars I am not your father.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“You wouldn’t have had a chance.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>It was impossible to resist his banter.</p>
			<p>“Tell me, you traveler,” said Christophe. “Do you know my country?”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“I bet you don’t know a word of German.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I do. I know it quite well.”</p>
			<p>“Let us see.”</p>
			<p>They began to talk German. The boy jabbered on quite ungrammatically with the most droll coolness; he was very intelligent and wide awake, and guessed more than he understood: often he guessed wrong; but he was the first to laugh at his mistakes. He talked eagerly about his travels and his reading. He had read a great deal, hastily, superficially, skipping half the pages, and inventing what he had left unread, but he was always urged on by a keen curiosity, forever seeking reasons for enthusiasm. He jumped from one subject to another, and his face grew animated as he talked of plays or books that had moved him. There was no sort of order in his knowledge. It was impossible to tell how he could read right through a tenth-rate book, and yet know nothing of the greatest masterpieces.</p>
			<p>“That is all very well,” said Christophe. “But you will never do anything if you do not work.”</p>
			<p>“Oh! I don’t need to. We are rich.”</p>
			<p>“The devil! Then it is a very serious state of things. Do you want to be a man who does nothing and is good for nothing?”</p>
			<p>“No. I should like to do everything. It is stupid to shut yourself up all your life in a profession.”</p>
			<p>“But it is the only means yet discovered of doing any good.”</p>
			<p>“So they say!”</p>
			<p>“What do you mean? ‘So they say!’⁠ ⁠… I say so. I’ve been working at my profession for forty years, and I am just beginning to get a glimmer of it.”</p>
			<p>“Forty years, to learn a profession! When can you begin to practise it?”</p>
			<p>Christophe began to laugh.</p>
			<p>“You little disputatious Frenchman!”</p>
			<p>“I want to be a musician,” said Georges.</p>
			<p>“Well, it is not too early for you to begin. Shall I teach you?”</p>
			<p>“Oh! I should be so glad!”</p>
			<p>“Come tomorrow. I’ll see what you are worth. If you are worth nothing, I shall forbid you ever to lay hands on a piano. If you have a real inclination for it, we’ll try and make something of you.⁠ ⁠… But, I warn you, I shall make you work.”</p>
			<p>“I will work,” said Georges delightedly.</p>
			<p>They said goodbye until the morrow. As he was going, Georges remembered that he had other engagements on the morrow, and also for the day after. Yes, he was not free until the end of the week. They arranged day and hour.</p>
			<p>But when the day and hour came, Christophe waited in vain. He was disappointed. He had been looking forward with childlike glee to seeing Georges again. His unexpected visit had brightened his life. It had made him so happy, and moved him so much that he had not slept the night after it. With tender gratitude he thought of the young friend who had sought him out for his friend’s sake. His natural grace, his malicious and ingenuous frankness had delighted him: he sank back into the mute intoxication, the buzzing of happiness, which had filled his ears and his heart during the first days of his friendship with Olivier. It was allied now with a graver and almost religious feeling which, through the living, saw the smile of the past.⁠—He waited all the next day and the day after. Nobody came. Not even a letter of excuse. Christophe was very mournful, and cast about for excuses for the boy. He did not know where to write to him, and he did not know his address. Had he had it he would not have dared to write. When the heart of an older man is filled with love for a young creature, he feels a certain modesty about letting him see the need he has of him: he knows that the young man has not the same need: they are not evenly matched: and nothing is so much dreaded as to seem to be imposing oneself on a person who cares not a jot.</p>
			<p>The silence dragged on. Although Christophe suffered under it, he forced himself to take no step to hunt up the Jeannins. But every day he expected the boy, who never came. He did not go to Switzerland, but stayed through the summer in Paris. He thought himself absurd, but he had no taste for traveling. Only when September came did he decide to spend a few days at Fontainebleau.</p>
			<p>About the end of October Georges Jeannin came and knocked at his door. He excused himself calmly, without being in the least put out by his long silence.</p>
			<p>“I could not come,” he said. “And then we went away to stay in Brittany.”</p>
			<p>“You might have written to me,” said Christophe.</p>
			<p>“Yes. I did try. But I never had the time.⁠ ⁠… Besides,” he said, laughing, “I forgot all about it.”</p>
			<p>“When did you come back?”</p>
			<p>“At the beginning of October.”</p>
			<p>“And it has taken you three weeks to come?⁠ ⁠… Listen. Tell me frankly: Did your mother prevent you?⁠ ⁠… Does she dislike your seeing me?”</p>
			<p>“No. Not at all. She told me to come today.”</p>
			<p>“What?”</p>
			<p>“The last time I saw you before the holidays I told her everything when I got home. She told me I had done right, and she asked about you, and pestered me with a great many questions. When we came home from Brittany, three weeks ago, she made me promise to go and see you again. A week ago she reminded me again. This morning, when she found that I had not been, she was angry with me, and wanted me to go directly after breakfast, without more ado.”</p>
			<p>“And aren’t you ashamed to tell me that? Must you be forced to come and see me?”</p>
			<p>“No. You mustn’t think that.⁠ ⁠… Oh! I have annoyed you. Forgive me.⁠ ⁠… I am a muddleheaded idiot.⁠ ⁠… Scold me, but don’t be angry with me. I love you. If I did not love you I should not have come. I was not forced to come. I can’t be forced to do anything but what I want to do.”</p>
			<p>“You rascal!” said Christophe, laughing in spite of himself. “And your musical projects, what about them?”</p>
			<p>“Oh! I am still thinking about it.”</p>
			<p>“That won’t take you very far.”</p>
			<p>“I want to begin now. I couldn’t begin these last few months. I have had so much to do! But now you shall see how I will work, if you still want to have anything to do with me.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>(He looked slyly at Christophe.)</p>
			<p>“You are an impostor,” said Christophe.</p>
			<p>“You don’t take me seriously.”</p>
			<p>“No, I don’t.”</p>
			<p>“It is too dreadful. Nobody takes me seriously. I lose all heart.”</p>
			<p>“I shall take you seriously when I see you working.”</p>
			<p>“At once, then.”</p>
			<p>“I have no time now. Tomorrow.”</p>
			<p>“No. Tomorrow is too far off. I can’t bear you to despise me for a whole day.”</p>
			<p>“You bore me.”</p>
			<p>“Please!⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Smiling at his weakness, Christophe made him sit at the piano, and talked to him about music. He asked him many questions, and made him solve several little problems of harmony. Georges did not know much about it, but his musical instinct supplied the gaps of his ignorance; without knowing their names, he found the chords Christophe wanted; and even his mistakes in their awkwardness showed a curiosity of taste and a singularly acute sensibility. He did not accept Christophe’s remarks without discussion; and the intelligent questions he asked in his turn bore witness to the sincerity of a mind that would not accept art as a devout formula to be repeated with the lips, but desired to live it for its own sake.⁠—They did not only talk of music. In reference to harmony Georges would summon up pictures, the country, people. It was difficult to hold him in check: it was constantly necessary to bring him back to the middle of the road: and Christophe had not always the heart to do so. It amused him to hear the boy’s joyous chatter, so full of wit and life. What a difference there was between his nature and Olivier’s! With the one life was a subterranean river that flowed silently; with the other all was above ground: a capricious stream disporting itself in the sun. And yet it was the same lovely, pure water, like their eyes. With a smile, Christophe recognized in Georges certain instinctive antipathies, likings and dislikings, which he well knew, and the naive intolerance, the generosity of heart which gives itself entirely to whatsoever it loves.⁠ ⁠… Only Georges loved so many things that he had no time to love any one thing for long.</p>
			<p>He came back the next day and the days following. He was filled with a youthful passion for Christophe, and he worked enthusiastically at his lessons.⁠ ⁠… —Then his enthusiasm palled, his visits grew less frequent. He came less and less often. Then he came no more, and disappeared for weeks.</p>
			<p>He was lighthearted, forgetful, naively selfish, and sincerely affectionate; he had a good heart and a quick intelligence which he expended piecemeal day by day. People forgave him everything because they were so glad to see him; he was happy.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Christophe refused to judge him. He did not complain. He wrote to Jacqueline to thank her for having sent her son to him. Jacqueline replied with a short letter filled with restrained emotion: she expressed a hope that Christophe would be interested in Georges and help him in his life. Through shame and pride she could not bring herself to see him again. And Christophe thought he could not visit her without being invited.⁠—So they stayed apart, seeing each other at a distance at concerts, bound together only by the boy’s infrequent visits.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The winter passed. Grazia wrote but seldom. She was still faithful in her friendship for Christophe. But, like a true Italian, she was hardly at all sentimental, attached to reality, and needed to see people if she were, perhaps not to think of them, but certainly to take pleasure in talking to them. Her heart’s memory needed to be supported by having her sight’s memory refreshed from time to time. Her letters became brief and distant. She was as sure of Christophe as Christophe was of her. But their security gave out more light than warmth.</p>
			<p>Christophe did not feel his new disappointments very keenly. His musical activity was enough to fill his life. When he reaches a certain age a vigorous artist lives much more in his art than in his life; his life has become the dream, his art the reality. His creative powers had been reawakened by contact with Paris. There is no stronger stimulant in the world than the sight of that city of work. The most phlegmatic natures are touched by its fever. Christophe, being rested by years of healthy solitude, brought to his work an enormous accumulation of force. Enriched by the new conquests forever being made in the fields of musical technique by the intrepid curiosity of the French, he hurled himself in his turn along the road to discovery: being more violent and barbarous than they, he went farther. But nothing in his new audacities was left to the hazardous mercies of his instinct. Christophe had begun to feel the need of clarity; all his life his genius had obeyed the rhythm of alternate currents: it was its law to pass from one pole to the other, and to fill everything between them. Having greedily surrendered in his last period to “the eyes of chaos shining through the veil of order,” even to rending the veil so as to see them more clearly, he was now striving to tear himself away from their fascination, and once more to throw over the face of the sphinx the magic net of the master mind. The imperial inspiration of Rome had passed over him. Like the Parisian art of that time, by the spirit of which he was infected, he was aspiring to order. But not⁠—like the reactionaries who spent what was left of their energies in protecting their slumber⁠—to order in Varsovia; the good people who are always going back to Brahms⁠—the Brahmses of all the arts, the thematics, the insipid neo-classics, in search of solace! Might one not say that they are enfeebled with passion! You are soon done for, my friends.⁠ ⁠… No, it is not of your order that I speak. Mine has no kinship with yours. Mine is the order in harmony of the free passions and the free will.⁠ ⁠… Christophe was studying how in his art to maintain the just balance between the forces of life. These new chords, the new musical daimons that he had summoned from the abyss of sounds, were used to build clear symphonies, vast, sunlit buildings, like the Italian cupola’d basilicas.</p>
			<p>These plays and battles of the mind occupied him all winter. And the winter passed quickly, although, in the evening, as he ended his day’s work and looked behind him at the tale of days, he could not have told whether it had been long or short, or whether he was still young or very old.</p>
			<p>Then a new ray of human sunshine pierced the veil of his dreams, and once more brought in the springtime. Christophe received a letter from Grazia, telling him that she was coming to Paris with her two children. For a long time she had planned to do so. Her cousin Colette had often invited her. Her dread of the effort necessary to interrupt her habits and to tear herself away from her careless tranquillity and the home she loved in order to plunge into the Parisian whirligig that she knew so well, had made her postpone the journey from year to year. This spring she was filled with melancholy, perhaps with a secret disappointment⁠—(how many unspoken romances there are in the heart of a woman, unknown to others, often unconfessed to herself!)⁠—and she longed to go right away from Rome. A threatened epidemic gave her an excuse for hurrying on her children’s departure. She followed her letter to Christophe in a very few days.</p>
			<p>Christophe hastened to her as soon as he heard she was at Colette’s. He found her still absorbed and distant. He was hurt, but did not show it. By now he was almost rid of his egoism, and that gave him the insight of affection. He saw that she had some grief which she wished to conceal, and he suppressed his longing to know its nature. Only he strove to keep her amused by giving her a gay account of his misadventures and sharing with her his work and his plans, and he wrapped her round with his affection. Her mournful heart rested in the heart of her friend, and he spoke to her always of things other than that which was in both their minds. And gradually he saw the shadow of melancholy fade from her eyes, and their expression became nearly, and ever more nearly, intimate. So much so, that one day, as he was talking to her, he stopped suddenly, and in silence looked at her.</p>
			<p>“What is it?” she asked.</p>
			<p>“Today,” he said, “you have come back to me.”</p>
			<p>She smiled, and in a low voice she replied:</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>It was not easy for them to talk quietly together. They were very rarely alone. Colette gave them the pleasure of her presence more often than they wished. In spite of her eccentricities she was extremely kind and sincerely attached to Grazia and Christophe; but she never dreamed that she could be a nuisance to them. She had, of course, noticed⁠—(for her eyes saw everything)⁠—what she was pleased to call Christophe’s flirtation with Grazia; flirtation was her element, and she was delighted, and asked nothing better than to encourage it. But that was precisely what she was not required to do; she was only desired not to meddle with things that did not concern her. It was enough for her to appear or to make an (indiscreet) discreet allusion to their friendship to one of them, to make Christophe and Grazia freeze and turn the conversation. Colette cast about among all the possible reasons, except one, and that the true one, for their reserve. Fortunately for them, she could never stay long. She was always coming and going, coming in, going out, superintending everything in her house, doing a dozen things at a time. In the intervals between her appearances Christophe and Grazia, left alone with the children, would resume the thread of their innocent conversation. They never spoke of the feelings that bound them together. Unrestrainedly they confided to each other their little daily happenings. Grazia, with feminine interest, inquired into Christophe’s domestic affairs. They were in a very bad way: he was always having ruptures with his housekeepers; he was continually being cheated and robbed by his servants. She laughed heartily but very kindly, and with motherly compassion for the great child’s small practical sense. One day, when Colette left them after a longer visitation than usual, Grazia sighed:</p>
			<p>“Poor Colette! I love her dearly.⁠ ⁠… But how she bores me!”</p>
			<p>“I love her too,” said Christophe, “if you mean by that that she bores us.”</p>
			<p>Grazia laughed:</p>
			<p>“Listen. Will you let me⁠ ⁠… (it is quite impossible for us to talk in peace here)⁠ ⁠… will you let me come to your house one day?”</p>
			<p>He could hardly speak.</p>
			<p>“To my house! You will come?”</p>
			<p>“If you don’t mind?”</p>
			<p>“Mind! Mercy, no!”</p>
			<p>“Well, then, will you let me come on Tuesday?”</p>
			<p>“Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, any day you like.”</p>
			<p>“Tuesday, at four. It is agreed?”</p>
			<p>“How good of you! How good of you!”</p>
			<p>“Wait. There is a condition.”</p>
			<p>“A condition? Why? Anything you like. You know that I will do it, condition or no condition.”</p>
			<p>“I would rather make a condition.”</p>
			<p>“I promise.”</p>
			<p>“You don’t know what it is.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t care. I promise. Anything you like.”</p>
			<p>“But listen. You are so obstinate.”</p>
			<p>“Tell me!”</p>
			<p>“The condition is that between now and then you make no change in your rooms⁠—none, you understand; everything must be left exactly as it is.”</p>
			<p>Christophe’s face fell. He looked abject.</p>
			<p>“Ah! That’s not playing the game.”</p>
			<p>“You see, that’s what comes of giving your word too hastily! But you promised.”</p>
			<p>“But why do you want⁠—?”</p>
			<p>“But I want to see you in your rooms as you are, every day, when you are not expecting me.”</p>
			<p>“Surely you will let me⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Nothing at all. I shall allow nothing.”</p>
			<p>“At least⁠—”</p>
			<p>“No, no, no! I won’t listen to you, or else I won’t come, if you prefer it⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You know I would agree to anything if you will only come.”</p>
			<p>“Then you promise.”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“On your word of honor?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, you tyrant.”</p>
			<p>“A good tyrant.”</p>
			<p>“There is no such thing as a good tyrant: there are tyrants whom one loves and tyrants whom one detests.”</p>
			<p>“And I am both?”</p>
			<p>“No. You are one of the first.”</p>
			<p>“It is very humiliating.”</p>
			<p>On the appointed day she came. With scrupulous loyalty Christophe had not dared even to arrange the smallest piece of paper in his untidy rooms: he would have felt dishonored had he done so. But he was in torture. He was ashamed of what his friend would think. Anxiously he awaited her arrival. She came punctually, not more than four or five minutes after the hour. She climbed up the stairs with her light, firm step. She rang. He was at the door and opened it. She was dressed with easy, graceful elegance. Through her veil he could see her tranquil eyes. They said “Good day” in a whisper and shook hands; she was more silent than usual: he was awkward and emotional and said nothing, to avoid showing his feeling. He led her in without uttering the sentence he had prepared by way of excusing the untidiness of his room. She sat down in the best chair, and he sat near her.</p>
			<p>“This is my workroom.”</p>
			<p>It was all he could find to say to her.</p>
			<p>There was a silence. She looked round slowly, with a kindly smile, and she, too, was much moved, though she would not admit it to herself. (Later she told him that when she was a girl she had thought of coming to him, but had been afraid as she reached the door.) She was struck by the solitary aspect and the sadness of the place: the dark, narrow hall, the absolute lack of comfort, the visible poverty, all went to her heart: she was filled with affectionate pity for her old friend, who, in spite of all his work and his sufferings and his celebrity, was unable to shake free of material anxiety. And at the same time she was amused at the absolute indifference revealed by the bareness of the room that had no carpets, no pictures, no bric-a-brac, no armchair; no other furniture than a table, three hard chairs, and a piano: and papers, papers everywhere, mixed up with books, on the table, under the table, on the floor, on the piano, on the chairs⁠—(she smiled as she thought how conscientiously he had kept his word).</p>
			<p>After a minute or two she asked him, pointing to his place at the table:</p>
			<p>“Is that where you work?”</p>
			<p>“No,” he said. “There.”</p>
			<p>He pointed to the darkest corner of the room, where there stood a low chair with its back to the light. She went and sat in it quietly, without a word. For a few minutes they were silent, for they knew not what to say. He got up and went to the piano. He played and improvised for half an hour; all around him he felt the presence of his beloved and an immense happiness filled his heart; with eyes closed he played marvelous things. Then she understood the beauty of the room, all furnished with divine harmonies: she heard his loving, suffering heart as though it were beating in her own bosom.</p>
			<p>When the music had died away, he stopped for a little while, quite still, at the piano; then he turned as he heard the breath of his beloved and knew that she was weeping. She came to him.</p>
			<p>“Thank you!” she murmured, and took his hand.</p>
			<p>Her lips were trembling a little. She closed her eyes. He did the same. For a few seconds they remained so, hand in hand; and time stopped; it seemed to them that for ages, ages, they had been lying pressed close together.</p>
			<p>She opened her eyes, and to shake off her emotion, she asked:</p>
			<p>“May I see the rest of the flat?”</p>
			<p>Glad also to escape from his emotions, he opened the door into the next room; but at once he was ashamed. It contained a narrow, hard iron bed.</p>
			<p>On the wall there was a cast of the mask of Beethoven, and near the bed, in a cheap frame, photographs of his mother and Olivier. On the dressing-table was another photograph: Grazia herself as a child of fifteen. He had found it in her album in Rome, and had stolen it. He confessed it, and asked her to forgive him. She looked at the face, and said:</p>
			<p>“Can you recognize me in it?”</p>
			<p>“I can recognize you, and remember you.”</p>
			<p>“Which of the two do you love best?” she asked, pointing to herself.</p>
			<p>“You are always the same. I love you always just the same. I recognize you everywhere. Even in the photograph of you as a tiny child. You do not know the emotion I feel as in this chrysalis I discern your soul. Nothing so clearly assures me that you are eternal. I loved you before you were born, and I shall love you ever after.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>He stopped. She stood still and made no answer: she was filled with the sweet sorrow of love. When she returned to the workroom, and he had shown her through the window his little friendly tree, full of chattering sparrows, she said:</p>
			<p>“Now, do you know what we will do? We will have a feast. I brought tea and cakes because I knew you would have nothing of the kind. And I brought something else. Give me your overcoat.”</p>
			<p>“My overcoat?”</p>
			<p>“Yes. Give it me.”</p>
			<p>She took needles and cotton from her bag.</p>
			<p>“What are you going to do?”</p>
			<p>“There were two buttons the other day which made me tremble for their fate. Where are they now?”</p>
			<p>“True. I never thought of sewing them on. It is so tiresome!”</p>
			<p>“Poor boy! Give it me.”</p>
			<p>“I am ashamed.”</p>
			<p>“Go and make tea.”</p>
			<p>He brought the kettle and the spirit-lamp into the room, so as not to miss a moment of his friend’s stay. As she sewed she watched his clumsy ways stealthily and maliciously. They drank their tea out of cracked cups, which she thought horrible, dodging the cracks, while he indignantly defended them, because they reminded him of his life with Olivier.</p>
			<p>Just as she was going, he asked:</p>
			<p>“You are not angry with me?”</p>
			<p>“Why should I be?”</p>
			<p>“Because of the litter here?”</p>
			<p>She laughed.</p>
			<p>“I will make it tidy.”</p>
			<p>As she reached the threshold and was just going to open the door, he knelt and kissed her feet.</p>
			<p>“What are you doing?” she said. “You foolish, foolish dear! Goodbye!”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>They agreed that she should come once a week on a certain day. She had made him promise that there should be no more outbursts, no more kneelings, no more kissing of her feet. She breathed forth such a gentle tranquillity, that even when Christophe was in his most violent mood, he was influenced by it; and although when he was alone, he often thought of her with passionate desire, when they were together they were always like good comrades. Never did word or gesture escape him which could disturb his friend’s peace.</p>
			<p>On Christophe’s birthday she dressed her little girl as she herself had been when they first met in the old days; and she made the child play the piece that Christophe used to make her play.</p>
			<p>But all her grace and tenderness and sweet friendship were mingled with contradictory feelings. She was frivolous, and loved society, and delighted in being courted, even by fools; she was a coquette, except with Christophe⁠—even with Christophe. When he was very tender with her, she would be deliberately cold and reserved. When he was cold and reserved she would become tender and tease him affectionately. She was the most honest of women. But even in the most honest and the best of women there is always a girl. She insisted on standing well with the world, and conformed to the conventions. She had fine musical gifts, and understood Christophe’s work; but she was not much interested in it⁠—(and he knew it).⁠—To a true Latin woman, art is of worth only in proportion as it leads back to life, to life and love.⁠ ⁠… The love which is forever seething, slumbering, in the depths of the voluptuous body.⁠ ⁠… What has she to do with the tragic meditations, the tormented symphonies, the intellectual passions of the North? She must have music in which her hidden desires can unfold, with the minimum of effort, an opera, which is passionate life without the fatigue of the passions, a sentimental, sensual, lazy art.</p>
			<p>She was weak and changing: she could only apply herself intermittently to any serious study: she must have amusement; rarely did she do on the morrow what she had decided to do the night before. She had so many childish ways, so many little disconcerting caprices! The restless nature of woman, her morbid and periodically unreasonable character. She knew it and then tried to isolate herself. She knew her weaknesses, and blamed herself for her failure to resist them, since they distressed her friend; sometimes, without his knowing it, she made real sacrifices for him; but, when all was told, her nature was the stronger. For the rest, Grazia could not bear Christophe to seem to be commanding her; and, once or twice, by way of asserting her independence, she did the opposite of what he asked her. At once she regretted it; at night she would be filled with remorse that she could not make Christophe happier; she loved him more than she would let him see; she felt that her friendship with him was the best part of her life. As usually happens with two very different people, they were more united when they were not together. In truth, if they had been thrust apart by a misunderstanding, the fault was not altogether Christophe’s, as he honestly believed. Even when in the old days Grazia most dearly loved Christophe, would she have married him? She would perhaps have given him her life; but would she have so given herself as to live all her life with him? She knew (though she did not confess it to Christophe) that she had loved her husband, and, even now, after all the harm he had done her, loved him as she had never loved Christophe.⁠ ⁠… The secrets of the heart, the secrets of the body, of which one is not very proud, and hides from those dear to one, as much out of respect for them, as in complacent pity for oneself.⁠ ⁠… Christophe was too masculine to divine them: but every now and then, in flashes, he would see how little the woman he most dearly loved, who truly loved him, belonged to him⁠—and that he could not wholly count on anyone, on anyone, in life. His love was not quenched by this perception. He even felt no bitterness. Grazia’s peace spread over him. He accepted everything. O life why should I reproach thee for that which thou canst not give? Art thou not very beautiful and very blessed as thou art? I must fain love thy smile, Gioconda.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Christophe would gaze at his beloved’s beautiful face, and read in it many things of the past and the future. During the long years when he had lived alone, traveling, speaking little but seeing much, he had acquired, almost unconsciously, the power of reading the human face, that rich and complex language formed by the ages. It is a thousand times richer and more complex than the spoken language. The spirit of the race is expressed in it.⁠ ⁠… There are perpetual contrasts between the lines of the face and the words that come from it. Take the profile of a girl, clear-cut, a little hard, in the Burne-Jones style, tragic, consumed by a secret passion, jealousy, a Shakespearian sorrow.⁠ ⁠… She speaks: and, behold, she is a little bourgeois creature, as stupid as an owl, a selfish, commonplace coquette, with no idea of the terrible forces inscribed upon her body. And yet such passion, such violence are in her. In what shape will they one day spring forth? Will it be in the lust of gain, conjugal jealousy, or splendid energy, or morbid wickedness? There is no knowing. It may be that she will transmit them to another creature of her blood before the time comes for the eruption. But it is an element with which we have to reckon as, like a fatality, it hovers above the race.</p>
			<p>Grazia also bore the weight of that uneasy heritage, which, of all the patrimony of ancient families, is the least in danger of being dissipated in transit. She, at least, was aware of it. It is a great source of strength to know our weakness, to make ourselves, if not the masters, the pilots of the soul of the race to which we are bound, which bears us like a vessel upon its waters⁠—to make fate our instrument, to use it as a sail which we furl or clew up according to the wind. When Grazia closed her eyes, she could hear within herself more than one disturbing voice, of a tone familiar to her. But in her healthy soul even the dissonances were blended to form a profound, soft music, under the guiding hand of her harmonious reason.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Unhappily it is not within our power to transmit the best of our blood to the creatures of our blood.</p>
			<p>Of Grazia’s two children, the little girl, Aurora, who was eleven years old, was like her mother; she was not so pretty, being a little coarser in fiber; she had a slight limp; she was a good little girl, affectionate and gay, with splendid health, abundant good nature, few natural gifts, except idleness, a passion for doing nothing. Christophe adored her. When he saw her with Grazia he felt the charm of a twofold creature, seen at two ages of life, two generations together.⁠ ⁠… Two flowers upon one stem; a Holy Family of Leonardo, the Virgin and Saint Anne, different shades of the same smile. With one glance he could take in the whole blossoming of a woman’s soul; and it was at once fair and sad to see: he could see whence it came and whither it was going. There is nothing more natural than for an ardent, chaste heart to love two sisters at one and the same time, or mother and daughter. Christophe would have loved the woman of his love through all her descendants, just as in her he loved the stock of which she came. Her every smile, her every tear, every line in her face, were they not living beings, the memories of a life which was before her eyes opened to the light, the forerunners of a life which was to come, when her eyes should be forever closed?</p>
			<p>The little boy, Lionello, was nine. He was much handsomer than his sister, of a finer stock, too fine, worn out and bloodless, wherein he was like his father. He was intelligent, well-endowed with bad instincts, demonstrative, and dissembling. He had big blue eyes, long, girlish, fair hair, a pale complexion, a delicate chest, and was morbidly nervous, which last, being a born comedian and strangely skilled in discovering people’s weaknesses, he upon occasion turned to good account. Grazia was inclined to favor him, with the natural preference of a mother for her least healthy child⁠—and also through the attraction which all kindly, good women feel for the sons who are neither well nor ill (for in them a part of their life which they have suppressed finds solace). In such attraction there is something of the memory of the husbands who have made them suffer, whom they loved even while they despised them, or the strange flora of the soul, which wax strong in the dark, humid hothouse of conscience.</p>
			<p>In spite of Grazia’s care equally to bestow her tenderness upon her children, Aurora felt the difference, and was a little hurt by it. Christophe divined her feeling, and she divined Christophe’s: they came together instinctively; while between Christophe and Lionello there was an antipathy which the boy covered up with exaggerated, lisping, charming ways⁠—and Christophe thrust from him as a shameful feeling. He wrestled with himself and forced himself to cherish this other man’s child as though he were the child whom it would have been ineffably sweet for him to have had by the beloved. He would not allow himself to see Lionello’s bad nature or anything that could remind him of the “other man”: he set himself to find in him only Grazia. She, more clear-sighted, was under no illusions about her son, and she only loved him the more.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>However, the disease which for years had been lying dormant in the boy broke out. Consumption supervened. Grazia resolved to go and shut herself up in a sanatorium in the Alps with Lionello, Christophe begged to be allowed to go with her. To avoid scandal she dissuaded him. He was hurt by the excessive importance which she attached to the conventions. She went away and left her daughter with Colette. It was not long before she began to feel terribly lonely among the sick people who talked of nothing but their illness, surrounded by the pitiless mountains rising above the rags and tatters of men. To escape from the depressing spectacle of the invalids with their spittoons spying upon each other and marking the progress of death over each one of them, she left the Palace hospital, and took a chalet, where she lived aloof with her own little invalid. Instead of improving Lionello’s condition, the high altitude aggravated it. His fever waxed greater. Grazia spent nights of anguish. Christophe knew it by his keen intuition, although she told him nothing: for she was growing more and more rigid in her pride; she longed for Christophe to be with her, but she had forbidden him to follow her, and she could not bring herself to confess: “I am too weak, I need you.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>One evening, as she stood in the veranda of the chalet in the twilight hour, which is so bitter for hearts in agony, she saw⁠ ⁠… she thought she saw coming up from the station of the funicular railway⁠ ⁠… a man walking hurriedly: he stopped, hesitating, with his back a little bowed. She went indoors to avoid his seeing her: she held her hands over her heart, and, quivering with emotion, she laughed. Although she was not at all religious she knelt down, hid her face in her hands; she felt the need of thanking someone.⁠ ⁠… But he did not come. She went back to the window, and, hiding behind the curtains, looked out. He had stopped, leaning against a fence round a field, near the gate of the chalet. He dared not enter. And, even more perturbed than he, she smiled, and said in a low voice:</p>
			<p>“Come.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>At last he made up his mind and rang the bell. Already she was at the door, and she opened it. His eyes looked at her like the eyes of a faithful dog, who is afraid of being beaten. He said:</p>
			<p>“I came.⁠ ⁠… Forgive me.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>She said:</p>
			<p>“Thank you.”</p>
			<p>Then she confessed how she had expected him. Christophe helped her to nurse the boy, whose condition was growing worse. His heart was in the task. The boy treated him with irritable animosity: he took no pains now to conceal it: he said many malicious things to him. Christophe put it all down to his illness. He was extraordinarily patient. He passed many painful days by the boy’s bedside, until the critical night, on passing through which, Lionello, whom they had given up for lost, was saved. And they felt then such pure happiness⁠—watching hand in hand over the little invalid⁠—that suddenly she got up, took her cloak and hood, and led Christophe out of doors, along the road, in the snow, the silence and the night, under the cold stars. Leaning on his arm, excitedly breathing in the frozen peace of the world, they hardly spoke at all. They made no allusion to their love. Only when they returned, on the threshold, she said: “My dear, dear friend!⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>And her eyes were lit up by the happiness of having saved her child. That was all. But they felt that the bond between them had become sacred.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>On her return to Paris after Lionello’s long convalescence, she took a little house at Passy, and did not worry anymore about “avoiding scandal”: she felt brave enough to dare opinion for her friend’s sake. Their life henceforth was so intimately linked that it would have seemed cowardly to her to conceal the friendship which united them at the⁠—inevitable⁠—risk of having it slandered. She received Christophe at all hours of the day, and was seen with him out walking and at the theater: she spoke familiarly to him in company. Colette thought they were making themselves too conspicuous. Grazia would stop her hints with a smile, and quietly go her way.</p>
			<p>And yet she had given Christophe no new right over her. They were nothing more than friends: he always addressed her with the same affectionate respect. But they hid nothing from each other: they consulted each other about everything: and insensibly Christophe assumed a sort of paternal authority in the house: Grazia listened to and followed his advice. She was no longer the same woman since the winter she had spent in the sanatorium; the anxiety and fatigue had seriously tried her health, which, till then, had been sturdy. Her soul was affected by it. In spite of an occasional lapse into her old caprices, she had become mysteriously more serious, more reflective, and was more constantly desirous of being kind, of learning and not hurting anyone. Every day saw her more softened by Christophe’s affection, his disinterestedness, and the purity of his heart: and she was thinking of one day giving him the great happiness of which he no longer dared to dream, that of becoming his wife.</p>
			<p>He had never broached the subject again after her first refusal, for he thought he had no right to do so. But regretfully he clung to his impossible hope. Though he respected what his friend had said, he was not convinced by her disillusioned attitude towards marriage: he persisted in believing that the union of two people who love each other, profoundly and devotedly, is the height of human happiness.⁠—His regrets were revived by coming in contact once more with the Arnauds.</p>
			<p>Madame Arnaud was more than fifty. Her husband was sixty-five or sixty-six. Both seemed to be older. He had grown stout: she was very thin and rather shrunken: spare though she had been in the old days, she was now just a wisp of a woman. After Arnaud’s retirement they had gone to live in a house in the country. They had no link with the life of the time save the newspaper, which in the torpor of their little town and their drowsy life brought them the tardy echo of the voice of the world. Once they saw Christophe’s name. Madame Arnaud wrote him a few affectionate, rather ceremonious words, to tell him how glad they were of his fame. He took the train at once without letting them know.</p>
			<p>He found them in the garden, dozing under the round canopy of an ash, on a warm summer afternoon. They were like Boecklin’s old couple, sleeping hand in hand, in an arbor. Sun, sleep, old age overwhelm them: they are falling, they are already half-buried in the eternal dream. And, as the last gleam of their life, their tenderness persists to the end. The clasp of their hands, the dying warmth of their bodies.⁠ ⁠… —They were delighted to see Christophe, for the sake of all the memories of the past he brought with him. They talked of the old days, which at that distance seemed brilliant and full of light.</p>
			<p>Arnaud loved talking, but he had lost his memory for names. Madame Arnaud whispered them to him. She liked saying nothing and preferred listening to talking: but the image of the old times had been kept alive and clear in her silent heart: in glimmers they would appear sharply before her like shining pebbles in a stream. There was one such memory that Christophe more than once saw reflected in her eyes as she looked at him with affectionate compassion: but Olivier’s name was not pronounced. Old Arnaud plied his wife with touching, awkward little attentions; he was fearful lest she should catch cold, or be too hot; he would gaze hungrily with anxious love at her dear, faded face, and with a weary smile she would try to reassure him. Christophe watched them tenderly, with a little envy.⁠ ⁠… To grow old together. To love in the dear companion even the wear of time. To say: “I know those lines round her eyes and nose. I have seen them coming. I know when they came. Her scant gray hair has lost its color, day by day, in my company, something because of me, alas! Her sweet face has swollen and grown red in the fires of the weariness and sorrow that have consumed us. My soul, how much better I love thee for that thou hast suffered and grown old with me. Every one of thy wrinkles is to me as music from the past.⁠ ⁠…” The charm of these old people, who, after the long vigil of life, spent side by side, go side by side to sleep in the peace of the night! To see them was both sweet and profitable and sorrowful for Christophe. Oh! How lovely had life and death been thus!⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>When he next saw Grazia, he could not help telling her of his visit. He did not tell her of the thoughts roused in him by his visit. But she divined them. He was tender and wistful as he spoke. He turned his eyes away from her and was silent every now and then. She looked at him and smiled, and Christophe’s unease infected her.</p>
			<p>That evening, when she was alone in her room, she lay dreaming. She went over the story Christophe had told her; but the image she saw through it was not that of the old couple sleeping under the ash: it was the shy, ardent dream of her friend. And her heart was filled with love for him. She lay in the dark and thought:</p>
			<p>“Yes. It is absurd, criminal and absurd, to waste the opportunity for such happiness. What joy in the world can equal the joy of making the man you love happy?⁠ ⁠… What! Do I love him?⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>She was silent, deeply moved, listening to the answer of her heart.</p>
			<p>“I love him.”</p>
			<p>Just then a dry, hard, hasty cough came from the next room where the children were sleeping. Grazia pricked her ears: since the boy’s illness she had always been anxious. She called out to him. He made no reply, and went on coughing. She sprang from her bed and went to him. He was irritated, and moaned, and said that he was not well, and broke out coughing again.</p>
			<p>“What is the matter?”</p>
			<p>He did not reply, but only groaned that he was ill.</p>
			<p>“My darling, please tell me what is the matter?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know.”</p>
			<p>“Is it here?”</p>
			<p>“Yes. No. I don’t know. I am ill all over.”</p>
			<p>On that he had a fresh fit of coughing, violent and exaggerated. Grazia was alarmed: she had a feeling that he was forcing himself to cough: but she was ashamed of her thought, as she saw the boy sweating and choking for breath. She kissed him and spoke to him tenderly: he seemed to grow calmer; but as soon as she tried to leave him he broke out coughing again. She had to stay shivering by his bedside, for he would not even allow her to go away to dress herself, and insisted on her holding his hand; and he would not let her go until he fell asleep again. Then she went to bed, chilled, uneasy, harassed. And she found it impossible to gather up the threads of her dreams.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The boy had a singular power of reading his mother’s thoughts. This instinctive genius is often⁠—though seldom in such a high degree⁠—to be found in creatures of the same stock: they hardly need to look at each other to know each other’s thoughts: they can guess them by the breathing, by a thousand imperceptible signs. This natural aptness, which is fortified by living together, was in Lionello sharpened and refined by his ever wakeful malevolence. He had the insight of the desire to hurt. He detested Christophe. Why? Why does a child take a dislike to a person who has never done him any harm? It is often a matter of chance. It is enough for a child to have begun by persuading himself that he detests someone, for it to become a habit, and the more he is argued with the more desperately he will cling to it. But often, again, there are deeper reasons for it, which pass the child’s understanding: he has no idea of them.⁠ ⁠… From the first moment when he saw Christophe, the son of Count Berény had a feeling of animosity towards the man whom his mother had loved. It was as though he had instinctively felt the exact moment when Grazia began to think of marrying Christophe. From that moment on he never ceased to spy upon them. He was always between them, and refused to leave the room whenever Christophe came; or he would manage to burst in upon them when they were sitting together. More than that, when his mother was alone, thinking of Christophe, he seemed to divine her thoughts. He would sit near her and watch her. His gaze would embarrass her and almost make her blush. She would get up to conceal her unease.⁠—He would take a delight in saying unkind things about Christophe in her presence. She would bid him be silent, but he would go on. And if she tried to punish him, he would threaten to make himself ill. That was the strategy he had always used successfully since he was a child. When he was quite small, one day when he had been scolded, he had, out of revenge, undressed himself and lain naked on the floor so as to catch cold.⁠—Once, when Christophe brought a piece of music that he had composed for Grazia’s birthday, the boy took the manuscript and hid it. It was found in tatters in a wood-box. Grazia lost her patience and scolded him severely. Then he wept and howled, and stamped his feet, and rolled on the ground, and had an attack of nerves. Grazia was terrified, and kissed and implored him, and promised to do whatever he wanted.</p>
			<p>From that day on he was the master: for he knew it: and very frequently he had recourse to the weapon with which he had succeeded. There was never any knowing how far his attacks were natural and how far counterfeit. Soon he was not satisfied with using them vengefully when he was opposed in any way, but took to using them out of spite whenever his mother and Christophe planned to spend the evening together. He even went so far as to play his dangerous game out of sheer idleness, or theatricality, to discover the extent of his power. He was extraordinarily ingenious in inventing strange, nervous accidents; sometimes in the middle of dinner he would be seized with a convulsive trembling, and upset his glass or break his plate; sometimes, as he was going upstairs, he would clutch at the banisters with his hand: his fingers would stiffen: he would pretend that he could not open them again; or he would have a sharp pain in his side and roll about, howling; or he would choke. Of course, in the end he developed a genuine nervous illness. Christophe and Grazia were at their wits’ end. Their peaceful meetings⁠—their quiet talks, their readings, their music, which were as a festival to them⁠—all their humble happiness was henceforth disturbed.</p>
			<p>Every now and then, however, the little imp would give them a respite, partly because he was tired of his playacting, partly because his child’s nature took possession of him again, and made him think of something else. (He was sure now that he had won the day.)</p>
			<p>Then, quickly, quietly, they would seize their opportunity. Every hour that they could steal in this way was the more precious to them as they could never be sure of enjoying it to the end. How near they felt to each other! Why could they not always be so!⁠ ⁠… One day Grazia herself confessed to her regret. Christophe took her hand.</p>
			<p>“Yes. Why?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“You know why, my dear,” she said, with a miserable smile.</p>
			<p>Christophe knew. He knew that she was sacrificing their happiness to her son: he knew that she was not deceived by Lionello’s lies, that she still adored him: he knew the blind egoism of such domestic affections which make the best pour out their reserves of devotion to the advantage of the bad or mediocre creatures of their blood, so that there is nothing left for them to give to those who would be more worthy, whom they love best, but who are not of their blood. And although he was irritated by it, although there were times when he longed to kill the little monster who was destroying their lives, yet he bowed his head in silence, and understood that Grazia could not do otherwise.</p>
			<p>So they renounced their life without vain recrimination. But if the happiness which was their right could be snatched from them, nothing could prevent the union of their hearts. Their very renunciation, their common sacrifice, held them by bonds stronger than those of the flesh. Each confided the sorrow of it all to the other, passed over the burden of it, and took on the other’s suffering: so even their sorrow became joy. Christophe called Grazia “his confessor.” He did not hide from her the weaknesses from which his pride had to suffer: rather he accused himself with too great contrition, and she would smilingly soothe his boyish scruples. He even confessed to her his material poverty; but he could only bring himself to do that after it had been agreed between them that she should neither offer him, nor he accept from her, any help. It was the last barrier of pride which he upheld and she respected. In place of the well-being which she could not bring into her friend’s life, she found many ways of filling it with what was infinitely more precious to him⁠—namely, her tenderness. He felt the breath of it all about him, during every hour of the day: he never opened his eyes in the morning, never closed them at night, without a prayer of love and adoration. And when she awoke, or at night, as often happened, lay for hours without sleeping, she thought:</p>
			<p>“My dear is thinking of me.”</p>
			<p>And a great peace came upon them and surrounded them.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>However, her health had given way. Grazia was constantly in bed, or had to spend the day lying on a sofa. Christophe used to go every day and read to her, and show her his new work. Then she would get up from the chair, and limp to the piano, for her feet were swollen. She would play the music he had brought. It was the greatest joy she could give him. Of all his pupils she and Cécile were the most gifted. But while Cécile had an instinctive feeling for music, with hardly any understanding of it, to Grazia it was a lovely harmonious language full of meaning for her. The demoniac quality in life and art escaped her altogether: she brought to bear on it the clarity of her intelligence and heart. Christophe’s genius was saturated with her clarity. His friend’s playing helped him to understand the obscure passions he had expressed. With closed eyes he would listen, and follow her, and hold her by the hand, as she led him through the maze of his own thoughts. By living in his music through Grazia’s soul, he was wedded to her soul and possessed it. From this mysterious conjugation sprang music which was the fruit of the mingling of their lives. One day, as he brought her a collection of his works, woven of his substance and hers, he said:</p>
			<p>“Our children.”</p>
			<p>Theirs was an unbroken communion whether they were together or apart; sweet were the evenings spent in the peace and quiet of the old house, which was a fit setting for the image of Grazia, where the silent, cordial servants, who were devoted to Christophe, extended to him a little of the respectful affection they had for their mistress. Joyous was it to listen to the song of the fleeting hours, and to see the tide of life ebbing away.⁠ ⁠… A shadow of anxiety was thrown on their happiness by Grazia’s failing health. But, in spite of her little infirmities, she was so serene that her hidden sufferings did but heighten her charm. She was his “<i xml:lang="de">liebe, leidende, und doch so rührende, heitre Freundin</i>” (“his dear, suffering, touching friend, always so bright and cheerful”). And sometimes, in the evening, when he left her with his heart big with love so that he could not wait until the morrow, he would write:</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="de">Liebe, liebe, liebe, liebe, liebe Grazia.⁠ ⁠…</i>”</p>
			<p>Their tranquillity lasted for months. They thought it would last forever. The boy seemed to have forgotten them: his attention was distracted by other things. But after this respite he returned to them and never left them again. The horrible little boy had determined to part his mother and Christophe. He resumed his playacting. He did not set about it upon any premeditated plan, but, from day to day, followed the whimsies of his spite. He had no idea of the harm he might be doing: he only wanted to amuse himself by boring other people. He never relaxed his efforts until he had made Grazia promise to leave Paris and go on a long journey. Grazia had no strength to resist him. Besides, the doctors advised her to pay a visit to Egypt. She had to avoid another winter in the northern climate. Too many things had tried her health: the moral upheaval of the last few years, the perpetual anxiety about her son’s health, the long periods of uncertainty, the struggle that had taken place in her without her giving any sign of it, the sorrow of sorrows that she was inflicting on her friend. To avoid adding to the trouble he divined in her, Christophe hid his own grief at the approach of the day of parting: he made no effort to postpone it; and they were outwardly calm, and, though inwardly they were very far from it, yet they succeeded in forcing it upon each other.</p>
			<p>The day came. A September morning. They had left Paris together in the middle of July, and spent their last weeks in Switzerland in a mountain hotel, near the place where they had met again six years ago.</p>
			<p>They were unable to go out the last five days: the rain came down in unceasing torrents: they were almost alone in the hotel, for all the other travelers had fled. The rain stopped on their last morning, but the mountains were still covered with clouds. The children went on ahead with the servants in another carriage. She drove off. He accompanied her to the place where the road began to descend in steep windings to the plain of Italy. The mist came in under the hood of the carriage. They were very close together, and they said no word: they hardly looked at each other. A strange light, half-day, half-night, wrapped them round.⁠ ⁠… Grazia’s breath left little drops of water on her veil. He pressed her little hand, warm under her cold glove. Their faces came together. Through her wet veil he kissed her dear lips.</p>
			<p>They came to the turn of the road. He got down, and the carriage plunged on into the mist and disappeared. For a long time he could hear the rumbling of the wheels and the horses’ hoofs. Great masses of white mist rolled over the fields. Through the close tracery of the branches the dripping trees dropped water. Not a breath of wind. The mist was stifling life. Christophe stopped, choking.⁠ ⁠… There was nothing now. Everything had gone.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>He took in a long breath, filling his lungs with the mist, and walked on. Nothing passes for him who does not pass.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
